It was in the 19th century, around 200 years after Diego Velázquez died, that the Spaniard’s significance in art history was properly recognised outside his own country. His complex, enigmatic portraits made him beloved.
Manet and Picasso both painted versions of his masterpieces, and perhaps more than any other master his legacy has been written largely through this modern lens.
His most famous work is Las Meninas, a group portrait of King Philip IV’s family. Widely considered to be the first painting self-consciously reflecting on what it means to represent the world in paint, it secretly proclaims the power and sway of the artist. But we shouldn’t let it distract us from the story of an exceptionally talented craftsman very much in and of his time.
A super, major exhibition at the Grand Palais has boldly ignored Las Meninas, disregarding the notion of Velázquez as a kind of artist philosopher. It presents him instead as a remarkably sensitive portrait painter, indebted to his contemporaries and deeply interested in the corruptibility of man.
His creativity and acerbic painterly wit were given room to flourish within conservative artistic confines, his lifelong service as court painter to King Philip IV beginning at age 23.
The show is chronological, starting with his teen years when he quickly discovered a talent for naturalism. His religious paintings look like portraits: his Virgins are not the heavenly porcelain beings that others were turning out, but the shy, proud models standing before him, diverting their eyes from his gaze.
A room devoted to his interest in “bodegón” paintings, set in taverns and kitchens, is revealing. It shows how captivated Velázquez was by people caught off-guard, how their ambiguous expressions could be used to tell moral tales in a cautionary and sympathetic way. In Three Musicians, a drunken boy looks out at the viewer, his gaze stupider than the monkey next to him, while his comrades drink themselves into oblivion.
Velázquez toned his style down during his first years at court, but as the King’s confidence in him grew, he honed his critical eye alongside astute subtlety, working out how to suggest his sitter’s flaws without being obviously critical.
This culminated, to chilling effect, in what is one of the greatest portraits ever painted, Pope Innocent X, whom he shows as a terse man with terrifying presence yet - as per the information contained in the folded paper in his hand - obviously holding something back.
Velázquez’s secret was to recognise that by suggesting something hidden, the viewer’s mind will do the rest. Nowhere is this clearer than in his intriguing nude, The Toilet of Venus. The goddess lies with her back to us, but revealing just enough of her face in a mirror to invite our devious imaginations to wander.