There aren’t many taboos left in the art world. Works of blood, sick and s--t have long been accepted as the norm. Much more contested, in fact, has been whether to include women in the narrative of art history.
Precious few appear in the canon: something which Tate, at last, is addressing. In 2015 it’s devoting retrospectives to five under-sung female artists. At Tate Modern, the two main exhibition spaces will also, for the first time, host solo shows by women simultaneously: the contemporary painter Marlene Dumas and abstract pioneer Sonia Delaunay.
This is, of course, laudable. Too many artists have been overlooked for too long simply because of their gender. Yet, laudability only gets you so far. First and foremost, an artist must have the quality to justify a Tate Modern show. Visitors have come to expect high standards for their £15 entrance fee: and just last summer, it was superb shows of Matisse and Malevich that were held there simultaneously.
How, then, does Delaunay get on? Rather well, it turns out. Though perhaps the more pressing question is: who was Sonia Delaunay?
Born into a Jewish family in Odessa, Ukraine, in 1885, Delaunay had a privileged youth, spent in St Petersburg and Germany, before settling in Paris. One of her first canvases, 1908’s Nu Jaune, depicts a prostitute detached from her boudoir backdrop by a thick, black outline indebted to Gauguin. Her bleached yellow skin set against dark décor, meanwhile, shows a connection with the Fauves.
Around this time, Sonia (née Stern) married fellow artist Robert Delaunay, and the suggestion is that, like a good wife, she rejected painting so as not to compete with him. She didn’t give up art altogether, though, embarking instead in a bold new direction.
A key work came in 1911, with the quilt cover she made for her infant son, Charles, from scraps of fabric. Its rough, geometric forms in different colours anticipated the collage experiments of Picasso and Braque. It also saw Delaunay turn her back on figuration and canvases in one fell swoop.
Together with her husband, she developed a theory called Simultaneism, essentially that of juxtaposing dynamically contrasting colours and shapes for maximum impact. In interviews, she always played down her own work at the expense of Robert’s – though, sadly, Tate has none of his on show, so we can’t say for sure whether she was being duly, or unduly, modest.
Delaunay made much of her Eastern European roots, which – thanks to Diaghilev’s Ballets Russes – were then de rigeur. She claimed her deep affinity for colour, moreover, stemmed from the “pure colours” of peasant weddings back in Ukraine.
Certainly this show is a riot of hues. The most modern aspect of Delaunay’s work, however, was the way these riots happened beyond fine art’s traditional confines. She embraced fashion, furniture, textiles and much else besides. On show are some of the “Simultaneous” dresses she designed in patchwork colours in rhythmic, geometric patterns – usually involving arcs, diamonds and concentric circles. She’d often wear these herself to Parisian balls – like a “living sculpture”, as Robert put it.
Fancy department stores like Liberty and Amsterdam’s Metz & Co seized on her fashion designs. As did clients like the Hollywood star Gloria Swanson and shipping heiress Nancy Cunard.
I can’t remember any Tate show placing quite so much emphasis on applied arts. In certain rooms, you can’t move for hats, scarves or swimming costumes. But that was the gap that Delaunay bridged.
Let’s be clear: her move into design wasn’t simply out of deference to Robert, though; it was out of economic necessity too. In the Bolshevik revolution of 1917, Sonia’s family lost the properties that were bankrolling her and Robert in Paris, so she needed an alternative means of funding. High-end fashion fitted the bill.
She didn’t completely give up painting, either. Among my favourite canvases is 1913’s Electric Prisms, a fusion of multi-coloured shapes capturing the dazzle of electric street lighting in Paris, the City of Light.
Robert died of cancer in 1941, after which Sonia returned to painting more committedly. Her palette grew a little darker. But it’s hard to spot too much evolution in style in her final decades, such that latter rooms of this exhibition do blur into one somewhat.
For all the different mediums she worked in, there are 350 works on show, and when it comes to geometric abstraction, a little goes a long way. You’d be forgiven for zoning out, forgetful you’re in an art gallery not a wallpaper warehouse.
That said, the times Delaunay lived through were fascinating. She spent the Second World War, for instance, keeping her Jewish heritage a secret and tentatively assisting the French Resistance. Before that, in 1937, she’d shown at the International Exhibition of Arts and Technology in Modern Life, in Paris: with three huge murals of an aeroplane's propeller, engine and dashboard.
The compositions convey full aerodynamic thrust and, though abstract, still include machine parts seamlessly. The irony is that the Exhibition would ultimately become famous for Picasso’s mural, Guernica, his response to the savage bombing of the eponymous Basque town – an abuse of the very air power Delaunay was celebrating.
I’d have liked to learn more from this show about her links with other abstract artists (Klee and Kandinsky, most obviously): it just enforces the stereotype she was a perpetual outsider not to address this.
In an ideal world, visitors would also be able to see the Matra 530 sports car she decorated in the late Sixties. But, then, in an ideal world, this wouldn’t be Delaunay’s first ever UK retrospective.